- [Instructor] Now, before we even get into
the Standard Edition APIs
and then start looking at the demos
and we move onto Enterprise Edition concurrency,
let's understand a few fundamental concepts.
We have known them for a while,
but let's revise them as a part of this course.
What is a process and what is a thread?
A process is a running instance
of an application or a program.
For example, on my machine, I may have Microsoft Word,
Microsoft Excel, NetBeans IDE,
and then MySQL server, Google Chrome browser
and so many programs installed,
but when I launch each one of them for my use,
then I'm trying to run an instance of that program,
and that is a process.
A process is always going to be in its self-contained
execution environment and it will require its own resources
and memory space to operate effectively
to provide multitasking on your machine.
Every process generally starts off with a single thread
and then many threads can be created from it.
Every process will have a unique process ID,
it'll have its virtual address space,
a set of environment variables, security context,
its executable code, et cetera.
Whenever you want to add a new process,
it is going to be a costly business.
That's because you want to create an altogether new
self-contained execution environment,
so that becomes really difficult.
Moreover, if you want to switch between processes,
then there has to be an interference
of the underlying operating system,
interprocess communication, IPC.
There are system calls that are required
from the underlying operating system,
which is going to incur excessive processing overhead.
Now, as opposed to this, a thread is a lightweight process.
It is an entity within a process trying
to exhibit multitasking for you.
For example, on my Microsoft Word process
that I'm running on my machine,
I can do many things simultaneously.
I can see the displayed text in front of me,
I can type in more text, and I can also
perform a spell check at the same time.
So, each of these jobs is being done by a thread
and all the threads work together
to provide you multitasking in that process.
So, when you talk about a thread, it is actually a part
of the process's execution environment,
which means it will share the virtual address space
and the system resources with the other threads in
that process.
This is exactly why when you create a new thread,
it will require fewer resources.
Also, switching from one thread to another is really not
that big a deal, as is the case with processes.
Now, this capability of providing multitasking
via threads in an application is exactly
what the multithreading API of Java is.
So, when we say that Java offers you
concurrency programming, yes, it does,
through the multithreading capability.
Every thread, like a process, will have its own thread ID,
it'll have its own set of exception handlers,
priority scheduling.
It will use registers, it will use stacks
to store local procedure calls or local variables,
and a set of structures that the system uses
in order to save the state or the context
of the thread until it is picked up for execution.
Right, so that's what it is.
Let's talk about a few other concepts.
Scheduling and thread priorities.
Okay, so what is scheduling?
Generally, when you have a single CPU,
all the threads will have to share it,
so what is the order of threads
that is executing in the application on that single CPU?
That's exactly scheduling.
Now, when it comes to Java platform,
Java virtual machine will never force any kind
of algorithm for scheduling of threads.
It generally relies on the underlying operating system
to schedule its threads for execution.
Of course, generally JVM uses a deterministic fixed
priority scheduling.
What does that mean?
It means that, let's say I have three threads in my system,
one, two, three, and I have thread number two,
which is called the highest priority,
then JVM is going to pick up thread number two
for execution first and then the rest
of the threads will follow.
However, let's say I have two threads
with the same priority.
Then JVM is going to arbitrarily pick up one of them
for execution.
Having said this, let's also understand
that JVM scheduling is preemptive.
Let's say I have those three threads that were executing
and suddenly, thread number four comes in
with the highest priority.
Then JVM is going to suspend the current thread's execution
and pick up thread number four
because it has got a higher priority,
and it'll give it a run.
This run will continue till the thread
either completes its job or maybe some other
higher priority thread enters the system.
Occasionally, JVM could also employ time slicing scheduling,
as per the underlying OS, which means, in this,
every thread is given an equal time slice for execution.
Once the time slice for a particular
thread's execution elapses, then JVM is going
to save the context of the thread
and pick up the next thread in line for its execution.
So, once all threads get the execution time,
JVM may come back to the first thread
and resume its execution by restoring its thread context.
So, the moral of the story is that we, as developers,
should exercise a lot of caution when we try
to develop multithreaded applications.
There is no guarantee when it comes
to JVM scheduling mechanism, it may be platform-dependent
because it doesn't really force anything.
It takes the help of the underlying operating system.
Let's talk about priorities now.
Generally, when you have threads
that get created in your application or the system,
they will have some normal priority, right?
Priorities signify which thread is going
to be first for execution.
Okay.
Now, when you talk about Java's multithreading API,
there is a facility in the API
by which you can assign your own priorities to the threads.
So, let's say you have a thread
and you assigned it the highest priority,
but beware, because as we spoke,
when JVM employs time slicing scheduling,
it can actually ignore the higher priority thread
and pick up a lower priority one instead
in order to avoid starvation.
So, when it comes to JVM, nothing is guaranteed
and we have to be very careful.
Never assume that the platform may use time slicing.
Never have any assumptions of those kinds.
And whenever a thread gets executed,
it always transits through many states
during its entire lifecycle.
So, from the time it was born
to the time it executes its job, till the time it is dead,
there are a lot of states that it goes through.
We will talk about those states in the upcoming videos.